In today’s day and age where stress, workload, and societal expectations torment one’s
emotional, physical and mental well-being, having strong social relations and meaningful
connections are extremely important to live a happy life. While some seek happiness by spending
time with friends and family or going out for vacations with their loved ones, many people choose
to join popular social media platforms like Facebook, Instagram and Snapchat in hope of becoming
happier. While on one hand these social media sites help people stay in touch with their friends, on
the other hand, they seem to isolate the users from the real world as they lose themselves in a
virtual environment that is not necessarily real and in fact— full of negativity and social
insecurities.
In my opinion, social media does not actually make us happier. Social media is excessively
being used as an escape from the real world by people whose minds are constantly occupied by just
one thought— “what would others think about me?” People often join these sites to flaunt their
exciting social lives. However, every time people share pictures or videos of themselves, they are
only interested in seeing how many likes, comments or re-posts they get on their images. It is as if
their happiness is merely determined by the response they get on their images posted on social
media— most of which might not even be real as photoshops and filters are often used by people
to make themselves appear prettier. In fact, people attend events and parties that they don’t actually
from my high school had posted an image of himself on Instagram after which he was
excessively trolled for his over-weight physique in the image. He was targeted and
made fun of heavily in the comments which led him to an emotional breakdown and
after months of being subject to mockery, he finally had to seek emotional help.
Simply put, his self-confidence, self-worth and emotional health was demolished.
The larger point here is that it is not only this boy from my high school who would
now start hating himself for what he is and become insecure for his appearance, but
like just so that they could post about it on social media. Because of the social insecurities that are
created by viewing other people’s posts, people can often force themselves to go out to parties to
show everyone else that they too are having fun. This form of social pressure can easily build a
serious sense of insecurity among people, especially teenagers, which would then make them
underconfident, anxious and also negatively affect their mental health. Moreso, people are so
addicted to posting on social media that even while they are actually having fun with friends on a
camp site per say, they would not be really enjoying the moment and spending time talking to their
friends. Instead, they are busy taking pictures and videos which they would later upload on social
media with the intention to show how adventurous and thrilling their weekends actually are.
An even larger reason to believe that social media does not actually make us happier is the
prevalence of one of the most significant social issues among teenagers: cyber-
bullying. Body shaming is one of the most common forms of cyber-bullying and in
fact a real-life example from my high school can best support this argument. A boy
that there are many more like him who constantly live in the fear of being judged,
trolled or teased for how they appear to be on social media. These instances lead to
teenagers feeling unconfident and insecure about themselves.
In conclusion, basis the arguments raised, social media creates insecurities among people
and in extreme cases, a sense of worthlessness or irrelevance due to an incident of cyberbullying.
To put it simply, you feel happy when you are safe, mindful, and involved in a moment that you
enjoy to the fullest. Clearly, while using social media you neither feel socially or emotionally
secure, nor do you feel happy as you disconnect yourself from the physical world to enter a realm
where you constantly compare your physical appearance, social life, and well-being with others.